.TH CLAMDSCAN-PROGRESS 1 "March 2026" "clamdscan-tools 0.2.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
clamdscan-progress \- execute clamdscan with progress display, resume support and exclusions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clamdscan-progress
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIPATH\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clamdscan-progress
is a wrapper around
.BR clamdscan (1)
that builds a file list, scans items one by one, keeps a resumable state file
and reports textual progress on standard output.
.PP
If no path is given, the command uses the targets configured in
.IR /etc/clamdscan-tools/clamdscan-tools.conf .
When
.B --system
is used, the configured system targets are used instead.
.PP
When run without root privileges, runtime files use the configured system
directories only if the current user can write there. Otherwise the command
falls back to per-user XDG paths under
.IR ~/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/
and
.IR ~/.local/share/clamdscan-tools/ .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --resume " FILE"
Resume a previous scan from the given state file.
.TP
.B --dry-run
Do not execute
.BR clamdscan ;
only show and record what would be scanned.
.TP
.B --no-tracker
Do not pause or resume Tracker, even if it is available.
.TP
.B --system
Use the system target list from the configuration file.
.TP
.B --verbose
Enable more verbose messages.
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show the built-in help text and exit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/clamdscan-tools/clamdscan-tools.conf
Main configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/clamdscan-tools/excludes.conf
Directory name exclusions.
.TP
.I /etc/clamdscan-tools/prune-paths.conf
Absolute paths excluded from the scan tree.
.TP
.I /etc/clamdscan-tools/exclude-file-patterns.conf
Filename patterns excluded from the scan.
.TP
.I /etc/clamdscan-tools/exclude-files.conf
Exact file paths excluded from the scan.
.TP
.I /var/log/clamdscan-tools/
Scan logs.
.TP
.I /var/lib/clamdscan-tools/state/
State files, file lists and auxiliary runtime data.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/
Per-user logs, state files, file lists and find error logs when system paths are not writable.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/clamdscan-tools/infected/
Per-user quarantine directory used for unprivileged runs.
.SH EXIT STATUS
The command exits with status 0 on success, 1 on runtime failure and 2 on
invalid command line usage.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Scan default targets as root:
.B sudo clamdscan-progress
.TP
Scan the configured system targets:
.B sudo clamdscan-progress --system
.TP
Scan a user directory:
.B clamdscan-progress ~/Descargas
.TP
Resume a previous run:
.B sudo clamdscan-progress --resume /var/lib/clamdscan-tools/state/scan_TIMESTAMP.state
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clamdscan-watch (1),
.BR clamdscan (1),
.BR info (1)
