\input texinfo
@setfilename clamdscan-tools.info
@settitle clamdscan-tools Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8

@dircategory Security
@direntry
* clamdscan-tools: (clamdscan-tools). Wrappers for clamdscan with progress and resume.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual documents clamdscan-tools, a Debian-oriented wrapper around
clamdscan with progress reporting, resumable scans and configurable exclusions.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title clamdscan-tools Manual
@subtitle Version 0.1.0
@author Javier Marcon
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top clamdscan-tools

@insertcopying

@menu
* Overview::
* Installation::
* Commands::
* Configuration::
* Runtime Files::
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

clamdscan-tools provides two command-line programs:

@itemize @bullet
@item @command{clamdscan-progress} runs scans with a progress indicator, resumable state files and configurable exclusions.
@item @command{clamdscan-watch} shows or follows the logs produced by completed or active scans.
@end itemize

The package is intended for Debian systems and integrates with the standard
filesystem layout for binaries, configuration, logs and Info documentation.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

Install the binary package with:

@example
sudo apt install ./clamdscan-tools_0.1.0_all.deb
@end example

Remove it with:

@example
sudo apt remove clamdscan-tools
@end example

Purge the package, including configuration files managed by dpkg, with:

@example
sudo apt purge clamdscan-tools
@end example

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@menu
* clamdscan-progress::
* clamdscan-watch::
@end menu

@node clamdscan-progress
@section clamdscan-progress

Synopsis:

@example
clamdscan-progress [OPTION]... [PATH]...
@end example

Important options:

@table @option
@item --resume FILE
Resume a previous run from an existing state file.

@item --dry-run
Build the scan list and record progress without calling @command{clamdscan}.

@item --no-tracker
Disable Tracker pause/resume integration for the current run.

@item --system
Use the configured system target list instead of default targets.

@item -h, --help
Display built-in usage help.
@end table

Examples:

@example
sudo clamdscan-progress
sudo clamdscan-progress --system
clamdscan-progress ~/Descargas
sudo clamdscan-progress --resume /var/lib/clamdscan-tools/state/scan_TIMESTAMP.state
@end example

When running without root privileges, runtime files are stored in the configured
system directories only if the current user can write there. Otherwise
@command{clamdscan-progress} falls back to per-user XDG paths under
@file{~/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/} and
@file{~/.local/share/clamdscan-tools/}.

@node clamdscan-watch
@section clamdscan-watch

Synopsis:

@example
clamdscan-watch [OPTION]...
@end example

Important options:

@table @option
@item --log FILE
Display the selected log file.

@item --follow, -f
Follow the selected log file using semantics similar to @command{tail -f}.

@item -h, --help
Display built-in usage help.
@end table

Examples:

@example
clamdscan-watch
clamdscan-watch --follow
clamdscan-watch --log /var/log/clamdscan-tools/scan_2026-03-23_12-00-00.log
@end example

@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

The package installs the following configuration files:

@table @file
@item /etc/clamdscan-tools/clamdscan-tools.conf
Main configuration file with default targets, runtime directories and optional integrations.
When the configured runtime directories are not writable for a non-root user,
the tool automatically falls back to
@file{$XDG_STATE_HOME/clamdscan-tools/} (or @file{~/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/})
and @file{$XDG_DATA_HOME/clamdscan-tools/} (or @file{~/.local/share/clamdscan-tools/}).

@item /etc/clamdscan-tools/excludes.conf
Directory-name exclusions such as @code{.git}, @code{node_modules} or cache folders.

@item /etc/clamdscan-tools/prune-paths.conf
Absolute paths to skip entirely, for example @file{/proc} or @file{/sys}.
@end table

@node Runtime Files
@chapter Runtime Files

During execution, clamdscan-tools stores data in standard locations. As root,
these are the default system paths:

@table @file
@item /var/log/clamdscan-tools/
Scan logs shown by @command{clamdscan-watch}.

@item /var/lib/clamdscan-tools/state/
State files used for resume, generated file lists and auxiliary logs.

@item /var/lib/clamdscan-tools/infected/
Destination directory for quarantined files when the scan runs with sufficient privileges.
@end table

When installed from the Debian package, system-managed runtime files are also
maintained automatically:

@itemize
@item Logs in @file{/var/log/clamdscan-tools/*.log} are rotated weekly with
@command{logrotate}, keeping 8 compressed archives.
@item Logs in @file{/home/*/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/log/*.log} are also
rotated weekly with @command{logrotate}, keeping 8 compressed archives.
@item Files under @file{/var/lib/clamdscan-tools/state/} are cleaned by
@command{systemd-tmpfiles}; entries older than 30 days are removed.
@end itemize

Automatic cleanup of per-user state files under
@file{~/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/state/} is not installed by the system
package.

For unprivileged runs where those system paths are not writable, runtime files
are stored in:

@table @file
@item ~/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/log/
Per-user scan logs.

@item ~/.local/state/clamdscan-tools/state/
Per-user state files, file lists and @command{find} error logs.

@item ~/.local/share/clamdscan-tools/infected/
Per-user quarantine directory.
@end table

For command-specific usage, see @command{info clamdscan-tools}, @command{man clamdscan-progress}
and @command{man clamdscan-watch}.

@bye
